=== TITLE: GDPval: Evaluating AI Model Performance on Real-World Economically Valuable Tasks ===
=== AUTHORS: Tejal Patwardhan, Rachel Dias, Elizabeth Proehl, Grace Kim, Michele Wang, Olivia Watkins, Simón Posada Fishman, Marwan Aljubeh, Phoebe Thacker, Laurance Fauconnet, Natalie S. Kim, Patrick Chao, Samuel Miserendino, Gildas Chabot, David Li, Michael Sharman, Alexandra Barr, Amelia Glaese, Jerry Tworek ===
=== PUBLISHED: 2025-10-05T21:36:43Z ===
=== ARXIV ID: 2510.04374v1 ===
=== ABSTRACT ===
We introduce GDPval, a benchmark evaluating AI model capabilities on real-world economically valuable tasks. GDPval covers the majority of U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Work Activities for 44 occupations across the top 9 sectors contributing to U.S. GDP (Gross Domestic Product). Tasks are constructed from the representative work of industry professionals with an average of 14 years of experience. We find that frontier model performance on GDPval is improving roughly linearly over time, and that the current best frontier models are approaching industry experts in deliverable quality. We analyze the potential for frontier models, when paired with human oversight, to perform GDPval tasks cheaper and faster than unaided experts. We also demonstrate that increased reasoning effort, increased task context, and increased scaffolding improves model performance on GDPval. Finally, we open-source a gold subset of 220 tasks and provide a public automated grading service at evals.openai.com to facilitate future research in understanding real-world model capabilities.

=== FULL TEXT ===
GDPval: Evaluating AI Model Performance on Real-World Economically Valuable Tasks

Tejal Patwardhan, Rachel Dias, Elizabeth Proehl, Grace Kim, Michele Wang, Olivia Watkins, Simón Posada Fishman, Marwan Aljubeh, Phoebe Thacker, Laurance Fauconnet, Natalie S. Kim, Patrick Chao, Samuel Miserendino, Gildas Chabot, David Li, Michael Sharman, Alexandra Barr, Amelia Glaese, Jerry Tworek

OpenAI

Abstract
We introduce GDPval, a benchmark evaluating AI model capabilities on real-world economically valuable tasks. GDPval covers the majority of U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Work Activities for 44 occupations across the top 9 sectors contributing to U.S. GDP (Gross Domestic Product). Tasks are constructed from the representative work of industry professionals with an average of 14 years of experience. We find that frontier model performance on GDPval is improving roughly linearly over time, and that the current best frontier models are approaching industry experts in deliverable quality. We analyze the potential for frontier models, when paired with human oversight, to perform GDPval tasks cheaper and faster than unaided experts. We also demonstrate that increased reasoning effort, increased task context, and increased scaffolding improves model performance on GDPval. Finally, we open-source a gold subset of 220 tasks and provide a public automated grading service at evals.openai.com to facilitate future research in understanding real-world model capabilities.

1 Introduction
There is growing debate about how increasingly capable AI models could affect the labor market—whether by automating specific tasks, replacing entire occupations, or creating entirely new kinds of work (Brynjolfsson et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025). Current approaches to measure the economic impact of AI focus on indicators such as adoption rates, usage patterns, and GDP growth attributed to AI (Chatterji et al., 2025; Tamkin et al., 2024; Appel et al., 2025; Acemoglu, 2025; Bick et al., 2024). However, historical evidence from technological shifts—such as electricity, airplanes, and computers—shows that the transition from invention to economy-wide permeation often takes years or even decades, requiring regulatory, cultural, and procedural changes (David, 1990; Brynjolfsson & Hitt, 2000; Brynjolfsson et al., 2017; Dwivedi et al., 2021; Solow, 1987). Therefore, while informative when available, these methods are lagging indicators of AI impacts. We consider an alternate method for understanding the potential economic impacts of AI: directly measuring AI model capabilities. AI capability evaluations can provide clearer, more directly attributable evidence about model abilities, allowing us to assess economic relevance ahead of widespread adoption.
